---
title: "MATH 261 Applied Calculus for Data Analysis"
output:
  word_document:
    toc: yes
    reference_docx: ../../cs_department/CSE250/250.CourseMap.docx
    keep_md: true
  html_document: 
    toc: yes
    toc_float: 
      collapsed: false
      smooth_scroll: false
params:
  course_id: "M261"
---






# Overview

## Materials:

There will be no student costs.  The course will be 4 credits with a capacity of 35 students.  The textbook is to be determined.

## Outcomes:

By the end of the semester, each student will be able to:

1. Apply their understanding of functions across discrete and continuous probability distributions and algebraic functions as mathematical models.
 1. Communicate mathematics using correct mathematical notation and appreciate the power of mathematical notation's role in data analytics.
 1. Use symbolic and numerical methods of differentiation to optimize functions and find the linear approximation of functions.
 1. Use symbolic and numerical methods of integration to calculate probabilities using probability density functions and cumulative distribution functions and derive expected value and variance on functions of random variables.

## Course Description:

The emphasis of this course is on choosing, fitting, and using mathematical models. Because data-driven problems are often messy and imprecise, the course will teach how to impose mathematical structure on these problems by developing structured mathematical problem-solving skills. The concepts associated with calculus will be taught as they relate to analytics.

Calculus topics of numerical and symbolic differentiation and integration and root finding will be covered. Additional topics covered include various representation of functions including graphs, tables, and equations; operations of functions; ability to work with discrete, continuous, and piece-wise functions; ability to work with functions in 1D and 2D; and familiarity with a library of functions related to statistics and probability including at least Binomial, Uniform, Exponential, and Normal distributions as well as basic algebraic functions like polynomials, exponential function, and logarithms.

# Course Details

## Syllabus

*Offering:* Full Semester

*Pre-Requisite:* (CS 101 or CS 124) and (ACT 23 or SAT 540 (Post 2016, 570)) or ALEKS 55 or MATH 101 or MATH110X or MATH109 or FDMAT112)

*Grading:*


- Preparation 25%: (Bi-weekly comprehension quizes) 
- Teach One Another 25%: (4 case study applications and presentations) 
- Ponder 20%: (6 readings on mathematical applications in data science and statistics) 
- Prove 30%: (Two exams.)

*Technology*

R, Python, Mathematica, or Wolfram Alpha

## Kuali

**Summary of request:** We are shelving Math 119 and creating a new applied calculus course that will be required of the data science majors.

**Rationale and supporting data for this request:** The course is being developed based on undergraduate DS program guidance from the American Statistical Association and The National Academies of Science, Engineering, and Medicine. The recommendations specifically state that a math methods course for data science students is developed that does not have an extensive set of traditional mathematics prerequisites.

**Request impact?** No

**Is this request required in any program?** Data Science

**Course Map:** NA

**Syllabus:** complete

**Request Type:** new

**Effective Catalog Year:** 2020-2021

**Subject Code, Course Number:** MATH 226

**Department:** Mathematics

**Abbreviated Transcript Title (32 characters):** App. Calculus for Data Analysis

**Catalog Course Title (100 characters):** Applied Calculus for Data Analysis

**Credits:** 4

**Grade Type:** Letter Grade

**Contact Hours:** 4.0.0 (Lecture, Lab,

**Repeatable Credit:** No

**Anticipated Maximum Enrollment:** 35

**Can this course be audited:** Yes

**Fees:** No

**Prerequisites:** (CS 101 or CS 124) and (ACT 23 or SAT 540 (Post 2016, 570)) or ALEKS 55 or MATH 101 or MATH110X or MATH109 or FDMAT112)

**Concurrent Requisites:** None

**Course Requirements:** laptop

**Equivalent Courses:** None

**Course Description for Catalog:** The emphasis of this course is on choosing, fitting, and using mathematical models. Because data-driven problems are often messy and imprecise, the course will teach how to impose mathematical structure on these problems by developing structured mathematical problem-solving skills. The concepts associated with calculus will be taught as they relate to analytics.

Calculus topics of numerical and symbolic differentiation and integration and root finding will be covered. Additional topics covered include various representation of functions including graphs, tables, and equations; operations of functions; ability to work with discrete, continuous, and piece-wise functions; ability to work with functions in 1D and 2D; and familiarity with a library of functions related to statistics and probability including at least Binomial, Uniform, Exponential, and Normal distributions as well as basic algebraic functions like polynomials, exponential function, and logarithms.

**Objectives:** see outcomes

**Course Syllabus Summary:** 

*How does this course relate to other courses?*

This course builds a foundation of mathematics to support learning in MATH 325, MATH 326, MATH 425, and CSE 450. It will also solidify the probability  and statistical summary concepts introduced in MATH 221.

*What do I need to be able to do before taking this course?*

Students need to have a comfortable understanding of algebraic manipulation.

*What will I be prepared to do after this course?*

Students will be able to use the principles associated with calculus to understand the mathematics behind statistical summaries, statistical distributions, and elements of machine learning.

